SETUP_INSTRUCTIONS.md, before:

# GitHub Organization Setup Instructions

## Current Status
✅ Repository created: https://github.com/unixthat/ENTROPYMAX2.0
✅ Code pushed to repository
✅ Project structure organized

## Next Steps

### 1. Create GitHub Organization "Group-31"

1. Go to https://github.com/organizations/new
2. Fill in the following details:
   - **Organization name**: `Group-31`
   - **Contact email**: [Your email]
   - **Plan**: Choose "Free" (unless you need paid features)
3. Click "Create organization"

### 2. Transfer Repository to Organization

Once the organization is created:

1. Go to https://github.com/unixthat/ENTROPYMAX2.0
2. Click on "Settings" tab
3. Scroll down to "Danger Zone"
4. Click "Transfer ownership"
5. Enter `Group-31/ENTROPYMAX2.0` as the new owner
6. Confirm the transfer

### 3. Add Team Members

After the repository is transferred to the organization:

1. Go to the organization settings: https://github.com/organizations/Group-31/settings
2. Navigate to "Teams" in the sidebar
3. Create a new team for the project
4. Add the six team members (including yourself)

### 4. Repository Access

Once transferred, the repository will be available at:
https://github.com/Group-31/ENTROPYMAX2.0

## Project Structure Summary

The project has been organized with the following structure:

```
ENTROPYMAX2.0/
├── legacy/                 # Original VB6 application
│   ├── src/               # Source files (.frm, .bas, .vbp)
│   ├── bin/               # Executables
│   ├── docs/              # Documentation
│   └── package/           # Installation packages
├── src/                   # New modern codebase
│   ├── core/              # Core algorithms
│   ├── ui/                # User interface
│   └── utils/             # Utilities
├── docs/                  # Project documentation
├── tests/                 # Test suite
├── examples/              # Examples
├── README.md              # Project overview
└── .gitignore            # Git ignore rules
```

## Next Development Steps

1. Analyze the legacy VB6 code to understand the entropy analysis algorithms
2. Design the modern architecture for the new application
3. Choose appropriate technology stack (Python, JavaScript, etc.)
4. Begin implementing core entropy analysis functions
5. Create modern user interface
6. Set up automated testing and CI/CD

## Contact

For any issues with the setup process, contact the Group 31 team.

Commit message:

Update setup instructions with CLI transfer command

SETUP_INSTRUCTIONS.md, after:

# GitHub Organization Setup Instructions

## Current Status
✅ Repository created: https://github.com/unixthat/ENTROPYMAX2.0
✅ Code pushed to repository
✅ Project structure organized

## Next Steps

### 1. Create GitHub Organization "Group-31"

✅ **Browser opened automatically** to https://github.com/organizations/new

Fill in the following details:
- **Organization name**: `Group-31`
- **Contact email**: [Your email]
- **Plan**: Choose "Free" (unless you need paid features)
- Click "Create organization"

### 2. Transfer Repository to Organization

Once the organization is created, you can transfer the repository using the GitHub CLI:

```bash
gh repo transfer ENTROPYMAX2.0 Group-31 --yes
```

Alternatively, you can do it through the web interface:
1. Go to https://github.com/unixthat/ENTROPYMAX2.0
2. Click on "Settings" tab
3. Scroll down to "Danger Zone"
4. Click "Transfer ownership"
5. Enter `Group-31/ENTROPYMAX2.0` as the new owner
6. Confirm the transfer

### 3. Add Team Members

After the repository is transferred to the organization:

1. Go to the organization settings: https://github.com/organizations/Group-31/settings
2. Navigate to "Teams" in the sidebar
3. Create a new team for the project
4. Add the six team members (including yourself)

### 4. Repository Access

Once transferred, the repository will be available at:
https://github.com/Group-31/ENTROPYMAX2.0

## Project Structure Summary

The project has been organized with the following structure:

```
ENTROPYMAX2.0/
├── legacy/                 # Original VB6 application
│   ├── src/               # Source files (.frm, .bas, .vbp)
│   ├── bin/               # Executables
│   ├── docs/              # Documentation
│   └── package/           # Installation packages
├── src/                   # New modern codebase
│   ├── core/              # Core algorithms
│   ├── ui/                # User interface
│   └── utils/             # Utilities
├── docs/                  # Project documentation
├── tests/                 # Test suite
├── examples/              # Examples
├── README.md              # Project overview
└── .gitignore            # Git ignore rules
```

## Next Development Steps

1. Analyze the legacy VB6 code to understand the entropy analysis algorithms
2. Design the modern architecture for the new application
3. Choose appropriate technology stack (Python, JavaScript, etc.)
4. Begin implementing core entropy analysis functions
5. Create modern user interface
6. Set up automated testing and CI/CD

## Contact

For any issues with the setup process, contact the Group 31 team.
