docs/BACKEND.md, before:

# Backend overview (C library and CLI)

This document describes the modular C backend in `backend/`: what each part does, how to build it, and how to use the command‑line tool in a two‑CSV merge → raw Parquet → processed Parquet pipeline.

## Layout

```
backend/
├─ CMakeLists.txt                  # Builds static lib `entropymax` and CLI `emx_cli`
├─ include/                        # Public headers (stable C ABI)
│  ├─ backend.h                    # High‑level config types and future convenience API
│  ├─ preprocess.h                 # Row/grand‑total normalisation; means/SD
│  ├─ metrics.h                    # Total inequality; CH; Z statistics
│  ├─ grouping.h                   # Initial groups; between‑inequality; Rs; optimiser
│  ├─ sweep.h                      # k‑sweep orchestration and per‑k metrics
│  ├─ csv.h                        # CSV reader table representation / API
│  ├─ parquet.h                    # Parquet writer API
│  └─ util.h                       # Allocation helpers
├─ src/
│  ├─ algo/
│  │  ├─ backend_algo.c           # Entrypoint glue (preprocess → sweep → write)
│  │  ├─ preprocess.c             # Noah: transforms and base stats
│  │  ├─ metrics.c                # Noah: total inequality, CH, Z
│  │  ├─ grouping.c               # Will: grouping engine & optimiser
│  │  └─ sweep.c                  # Will: k‑sweep orchestration
│  ├─ io/
│  │  ├─ csv_reader.c             # CSV → in‑memory table (placeholder)
│  │  └─ parquet_writer.c         # Table → Parquet (placeholder; writes processed Parquet)
│  ├─ util/
│  │  └─ util.c                   # Tiny alloc wrappers
│  └─ cli/
│     └─ emx_cli.c                # CLI: reads CSV, runs algorithm, writes Parquet
└─ tests/
   └─ test_backend.c              # C tests (add cases as implementation lands)
```

## Responsibilities

- `include/backend.h`
  - Defines `em_config_t` (run configuration) and a future convenience API `em_run_from_csv(...)`.
  - Keep types ABI‑stable; favour POD structs, explicit sizes, and error codes.

- `include/algo.h` / `src/algo/backend_algo.c`
  - Algorithm entrypoint `em_run_algo(...)` receives a dense, row‑major numeric matrix with optional row/column names and an output Parquet path for processed Parquet.
  - Today it forwards directly to the Parquet writer; the entropy/classification logic will be implemented here next.

- `include/csv.h` / `src/io/csv_reader.c`
  - Loads a CSV into a `csv_table_t` (SoA‑ish bundle: `double* data`, `char** colnames`, `char** rownames`, `rows`, `cols`). Used by the CSV→raw Parquet converter.
  - Placeholder returns an error until implemented.
  - Target dialect: first row header, first column sample IDs, comma separator. This will be made configurable later.

- `include/parquet.h` / `src/io/parquet_writer.c`
  - Writes processed results to Parquet (Arrow/Parquet C API planned).
  - Placeholder returns an error until implemented. During early prototyping we may route Parquet I/O via the Python layer.

- `src/cli/emx_cli.c`
  - Minimal CLI that wires CSV → algorithm → Parquet. Intended for batch usage and CI.

- `src/util/util.c` / `include/util.h`
  - Small allocation helpers, kept trivial for now.

## Team workflow and branches

- Base integration branch for backend: `feature/backend-c-core`
- Individual work branches:
  - Noah: `user/backend-noah`
  - Will: `user/backend-will`
  - Ben (I/O): use a personal branch or `user/ben-wrapper` if preferred
- Rebase policy:
  - Keep personal branches rebased on `feature/backend-c-core`, which is rebased on `main`
  - Open PRs from personal branches into `feature/backend-c-core`
  - After green CI on `feature/backend-c-core`, fast‑forward into `main`

Common commands
```bash
# Update local
git fetch --all --prune

# Switch to your branch and rebase on integration
git switch user/backend-noah   # or user/backend-will
git rebase origin/feature/backend-c-core

# Push your updates
git push -f
```

## Precise allocations (VB6 → C, owner, file)

- Data loading
  - FileK3 — Ben
    - `backend/src/io/csv_reader.c` (csv_read_table)
    - `backend/include/csv.h`

- Grouping data — Will
  - SetGroups → `backend/src/algo/grouping.c` (em_set_groups)
  - INITIALgroup → `backend/src/algo/grouping.c` (em_initial_groups)
  - SWITCHgroup → `backend/src/algo/grouping.c` (in em_optimise_groups loop)
  - OPTIMALgroup → `backend/src/algo/grouping.c` (accept/revert inside em_optimise_groups)
  - LOOPgroupsize → `backend/src/algo/sweep.c` (em_sweep_k)

- Statistics
  - MeansSTdev — Noah → `backend/src/algo/preprocess.c` (em_means_sd)
  - TOTALinequality — Noah → `backend/src/algo/metrics.c` (em_total_inequality)
  - BETWEENinquality — Will → `backend/src/algo/grouping.c` (em_between_inequality)
  - RSstatistic — Will → `backend/src/algo/grouping.c` (em_rs_stat)
  - CHTest — Noah → `backend/src/algo/metrics.c` (em_ch_stat)

- Data transformation
  - Proportion — Noah → `backend/src/algo/preprocess.c` (em_proportion)
  - GDTLproportion — Noah → `backend/src/algo/preprocess.c` (em_gdtl_percent)

- Data write
  - SAVEdata — Steve → `backend/src/io/parquet_writer.c` (parquet_write_table) [interim CSV writer optional]
  - BESTgroup — Noah → covered via final outputs (members list) and Z stats
  - RITE (Z stats) — Noah → `backend/src/algo/metrics.c` (em_group_zstats)

Entry points
- Library compute entrypoint: `em_prepare_and_sweep(...)` in `sweep.h` (preprocessed working copy → totals → sweep).
- CLI-only glue: `em_run_algo(...)` in `src/algo/backend_algo.c` (compiled into `emx_cli` only).

## Implementation checklist

- Determinism: CH permutations must use a deterministic RNG with a configurable seed
- Precision: use `double` throughout; preserve VB6 base‑2 logs and zero guards
- Negative‑variance guard in SD: if (E[x^2] − mean^2) ∈ (−1e−4, 0) → 0
- Initial groups: equal blocks; remainder to last group
- Tie‑break for optimal k: highest CH; if tie, choose smallest k
- No temp files; all data in memory
- Return codes: 0 = success; non‑zero = error (documented in headers)
 - Return codes: unified `em_status_t` in `include/util.h` (0=EM_OK; negative values for errors)

## Build and test

Build
```bash
chmod +x scripts/build_backend.sh
./scripts/build_backend.sh
```

Run CLI (placeholder writer currently):
```bash
backend/build/emx_cli input.csv output.parquet
```

Developer CSV runner (fixed paths; used during porting):
```bash
cc -Ibackend/include -o run_entropymax \
  backend/src/algo/run_entropymax.c backend/src/algo/preprocess.c \
  backend/src/algo/metrics.c backend/src/algo/sweep.c backend/src/algo/grouping.c -lm
./run_entropymax
```

Tests (C): add tests under `backend/tests/` and register with CTest in CMake.

## Current status

- Module files are scaffolded with clearly marked placeholders and owners:
  - preprocess.c (Noah), metrics.c (Noah), grouping.c (Will), sweep.c (Will)
  - Each function currently returns `-1` and includes a TODO with the VB6 mapping
- Entry point `em_run_algo` is implemented as orchestration glue
- Parquet writer is a stub; Steve to implement

## Build

Requirements:
- CMake ≥ 3.16
- A C11 compiler (clang/gcc/msvc)

Commands:
```bash
cmake -S backend -B backend/build
cmake --build backend/build --config Release
```

Outputs:
- Static library: `backend/build/libentropymax.*`
- CLI executable: `backend/build/emx_cli` (intended: accepts raw Parquet, writes processed Parquet)

Single sources of truth (paths used by runner and frontend):
- Input CSVs (authoritative raw inputs):
  - `data/raw/inputs/<dataset>_input.csv` (bin data)
  - `data/raw/gps/<dataset>_coordinates.csv` (GPS)
- Processed Parquet (authoritative analysis result consumed by frontend):
  - `data/parquet/output.parquet`

Run tests (via CTest):
```bash
cd backend/build
ctest --output-on-failure
```

## CLI usage

### I/O flow (planned)
```bash
# 1) Merge inputs → raw Parquet
#    - gps.csv (lat, lon, sample_id, ...)
#    - raw.csv (sample_id, var1, var2, ...)
csv_to_parquet --gps gps.csv --raw raw.csv --out raw.parquet

# 2) C backend: raw.parquet → processed.parquet
backend/build/emx_cli raw.parquet processed.parquet
```
Raw Parquet schema (example):
- sample_id (string)
- lat (double)
- lon (double)
- var1..varN (double)

Processed Parquet schema (example):
- per‑k metrics (k, CH, Rs, SST, SSE, perm stats)
- optimal_k (int)
- assignments (sample_id, group)
- group_means (k × variables)
- Exits with non‑zero on error (currently, CSV/Parquet are unimplemented placeholders, so it will error until those are filled in).

Developer CSV output (current runner):
- Header once: `K,Group,Sample,<bin columns...>,% explained,Total inequality,Between region inequality,Total sum of squares,Within group sum of squares,Calinski-Harabasz pseudo-F statistic`
- Rows for every k=2..20, preserving input row order within each group; raw numeric tokens are preserved for data cells; metrics appended as columns per row.
 - Output is regression-tested locally against `data/processed/sample_output_CORRECT.csv`.

### Header deprecation note
- `include/algo.h` and `include/backend.h` are retained for the CLI pathway only and are considered deprecated for consumers of the library. New code should include `sweep.h` and use `em_prepare_and_sweep(...)` (and the lower-level APIs in `preprocess.h`, `metrics.h`, and `grouping.h`).

## C APIs (current state)

- High‑level config (future convenience call):
```c
// backend/include/backend.h
typedef struct {
  int32_t num_samples;
  int32_t num_variables;
  bool row_proportions;
  bool grand_total_norm;
  bool ch_permutations;
  int32_t ch_permutations_n;
  uint64_t rng_seed;
} em_config_t;

int em_run_from_csv(const char *csv_path,
                    const char *parquet_out_path,
                    const em_config_t *cfg);
```

- Algorithm entrypoint (array → Parquet):
```c
// backend/include/algo.h
int em_run_algo(const double *data,
                int32_t rows,
                int32_t cols,
                const char *const *colnames,
                const char *const *rownames,
                const char *parquet_out_path);
```

- CSV table representation:
```c
// backend/include/csv.h
typedef struct {
  double *data;      // row‑major [rows * cols]
  char **colnames;   // size cols
  char **rownames;   // size rows
  int32_t rows;
  int32_t cols;
} csv_table_t;

int csv_read_table(const char *path, csv_table_t *out);
void csv_free_table(csv_table_t *t);
```

## Roadmap (backend)
- Implement CSV parsing (libcsv/Arrow CSV or a small internal reader).
- Implement Parquet writing (Apache Arrow C/GLib APIs), with a short‑term Python‑mediated fallback if needed.
- Port the VB6 entropy/classification routine into `src/algo/backend_algo.c` using `double` precision and the config in `em_config_t`.
- Add unit tests in `backend/tests/` and wire them in CTest (already configured).

## Notes
- The C library is designed for a stable ABI so Python bindings (cffi, if we decide to use it) can link without churn.
- No temp files are used; data flows in‑memory from CSV to Parquet.
- Error handling is via integer return codes (0 success, non‑zero error); an error enum will be added when CSV/Parquet are implemented.

Commit message:

docs: update backend/frontend IO docs; add QA plan; build: simplify Makefile verify; test: make CSV parity optional

docs/BACKEND.md, after:

# Backend overview (C library and CLI)

This document describes the modular C backend in `backend/`: what each part does, how to build it, and how to use the command‑line tool in a two‑CSV merge → raw Parquet → processed Parquet pipeline.

## Layout

```
backend/
├─ CMakeLists.txt                  # Builds static lib `entropymax` and CLI `emx_cli`
├─ include/                        # Public headers (stable C ABI)
│  ├─ backend.h                    # High‑level config types and future convenience API
│  ├─ preprocess.h                 # Row/grand‑total normalisation; means/SD
│  ├─ metrics.h                    # Total inequality; CH; Z statistics
│  ├─ grouping.h                   # Initial groups; between‑inequality; Rs; optimiser
│  ├─ sweep.h                      # k‑sweep orchestration and per‑k metrics
│  ├─ csv.h                        # CSV reader table representation / API
│  ├─ parquet.h                    # Parquet writer API
│  └─ util.h                       # Allocation helpers
├─ src/
│  ├─ algo/
│  │  ├─ backend_algo.c           # Entrypoint glue (preprocess → sweep → write)
│  │  ├─ preprocess.c             # Noah: transforms and base stats
│  │  ├─ metrics.c                # Noah: total inequality, CH, Z
│  │  ├─ grouping.c               # Will: grouping engine & optimiser
│  │  └─ sweep.c                  # Will: k‑sweep orchestration
│  ├─ io/
│  │  ├─ csv_reader.c             # CSV → in‑memory table (placeholder)
│  │  └─ parquet_writer.c         # Table → Parquet (placeholder; writes processed Parquet)
│  ├─ util/
│  │  └─ util.c                   # Tiny alloc wrappers
│  └─ cli/
│     └─ emx_cli.c                # CLI: reads CSV, runs algorithm, writes Parquet
└─ tests/
   └─ test_backend.c              # C tests (add cases as implementation lands)
```

## Responsibilities

- `include/backend.h`
  - Defines `em_config_t` (run configuration) and a future convenience API `em_run_from_csv(...)`.
  - Keep types ABI‑stable; favour POD structs, explicit sizes, and error codes.

- `include/algo.h` / `src/algo/backend_algo.c`
  - Algorithm entrypoint `em_run_algo(...)` receives a dense, row‑major numeric matrix with optional row/column names and an output Parquet path for processed Parquet.
  - Today it forwards directly to the Parquet writer; the entropy/classification logic will be implemented here next.

- `include/csv.h` / `src/io/csv_reader.c`
  - Loads a CSV into a `csv_table_t` (SoA‑ish bundle: `double* data`, `char** colnames`, `char** rownames`, `rows`, `cols`). Used by the CSV→raw Parquet converter.
  - Placeholder returns an error until implemented.
  - Target dialect: first row header, first column sample IDs, comma separator. This will be made configurable later.

- `include/parquet.h` / `src/io/parquet_writer.c`
  - Writes processed results to Parquet (Arrow/Parquet C API planned).
  - Placeholder returns an error until implemented. During early prototyping we may route Parquet I/O via the Python layer.

- `src/cli/emx_cli.c`
  - Minimal CLI that wires CSV → algorithm → Parquet. Intended for batch usage and CI.

- `src/util/util.c` / `include/util.h`
  - Small allocation helpers, kept trivial for now.

## Team workflow and branches

- Base integration branch for backend: `feature/backend-c-core`
- Individual work branches:
  - Noah: `user/backend-noah`
  - Will: `user/backend-will`
  - Ben (I/O): use a personal branch or `user/ben-wrapper` if preferred
- Rebase policy:
  - Keep personal branches rebased on `feature/backend-c-core`, which is rebased on `main`
  - Open PRs from personal branches into `feature/backend-c-core`
  - After green CI on `feature/backend-c-core`, fast‑forward into `main`

Common commands
```bash
# Update local
git fetch --all --prune

# Switch to your branch and rebase on integration
git switch user/backend-noah   # or user/backend-will
git rebase origin/feature/backend-c-core

# Push your updates
git push -f
```

## Precise allocations (VB6 → C, owner, file)

- Data loading
  - FileK3 — Ben
    - `backend/src/io/csv_reader.c` (csv_read_table)
    - `backend/include/csv.h`

- Grouping data — Will
  - SetGroups → `backend/src/algo/grouping.c` (em_set_groups)
  - INITIALgroup → `backend/src/algo/grouping.c` (em_initial_groups)
  - SWITCHgroup → `backend/src/algo/grouping.c` (in em_optimise_groups loop)
  - OPTIMALgroup → `backend/src/algo/grouping.c` (accept/revert inside em_optimise_groups)
  - LOOPgroupsize → `backend/src/algo/sweep.c` (em_sweep_k)

- Statistics
  - MeansSTdev — Noah → `backend/src/algo/preprocess.c` (em_means_sd)
  - TOTALinequality — Noah → `backend/src/algo/metrics.c` (em_total_inequality)
  - BETWEENinquality — Will → `backend/src/algo/grouping.c` (em_between_inequality)
  - RSstatistic — Will → `backend/src/algo/grouping.c` (em_rs_stat)
  - CHTest — Noah → `backend/src/algo/metrics.c` (em_ch_stat)

- Data transformation
  - Proportion — Noah → `backend/src/algo/preprocess.c` (em_proportion)
  - GDTLproportion — Noah → `backend/src/algo/preprocess.c` (em_gdtl_percent)

- Data write
  - SAVEdata — Steve → `backend/src/io/parquet_writer.c` (parquet_write_table) [interim CSV writer optional]
  - BESTgroup — Noah → covered via final outputs (members list) and Z stats
  - RITE (Z stats) — Noah → `backend/src/algo/metrics.c` (em_group_zstats)

Entry points
- Library compute entrypoint: `em_prepare_and_sweep(...)` in `sweep.h` (preprocessed working copy → totals → sweep).
- CLI-only glue: `em_run_algo(...)` in `src/algo/backend_algo.c` (compiled into `emx_cli` only).

## Implementation checklist

- Determinism: CH permutations must use a deterministic RNG with a configurable seed
- Precision: use `double` throughout; preserve VB6 base‑2 logs and zero guards
- Negative‑variance guard in SD: if (E[x^2] − mean^2) ∈ (−1e−4, 0) → 0
- Initial groups: equal blocks; remainder to last group
- Tie‑break for optimal k: highest CH; if tie, choose smallest k
- No temp files; all data in memory
- Return codes: 0 = success; non‑zero = error (documented in headers)
 - Return codes: unified `em_status_t` in `include/util.h` (0=EM_OK; negative values for errors)

## Build and test

Build
```bash
chmod +x scripts/build_backend.sh
./scripts/build_backend.sh
```

Run CLI (placeholder writer currently):
```bash
backend/build/emx_cli input.csv output.parquet
```

Developer CSV runner (fixed paths; used during porting):
```bash
cc -Ibackend/include -o run_entropymax \
  backend/src/algo/run_entropymax.c backend/src/algo/preprocess.c \
  backend/src/algo/metrics.c backend/src/algo/sweep.c backend/src/algo/grouping.c -lm
./run_entropymax
```

Tests (C): add tests under `backend/tests/` and register with CTest in CMake.

## Current status

- Module files are scaffolded with clearly marked placeholders and owners:
  - preprocess.c (Noah), metrics.c (Noah), grouping.c (Will), sweep.c (Will)
  - Each function currently returns `-1` and includes a TODO with the VB6 mapping
- Entry point `em_run_algo` is implemented as orchestration glue
- Parquet writer is implemented via `backend/src/io/parquet_io.cc` and invoked by the developer runner `run_entropymax` to produce `data/parquet/output.parquet`. Python utilities remain for legacy/regression workflows only.

## Build

Requirements:
- CMake ≥ 3.16
- A C11 compiler (clang/gcc/msvc)

Commands:
```bash
cmake -S backend -B backend/build
cmake --build backend/build --config Release
```

Outputs:
- Static library: `backend/build/libentropymax.*`
- CLI executable: `backend/build/emx_cli` (intended: accepts raw Parquet, writes processed Parquet)

Single sources of truth (paths used by runner and frontend):
- Input CSVs (authoritative raw inputs):
  - `data/raw/inputs/<dataset>_input.csv` (bin data)
  - `data/raw/gps/<dataset>_coordinates.csv` (GPS)
- Processed Parquet (authoritative analysis result consumed by frontend):
  - `data/parquet/output.parquet`

Run tests (via CTest):
```bash
cd backend/build
ctest --output-on-failure
```

## CLI usage

### I/O flow (planned)
```bash
# 1) Merge inputs → raw Parquet
#    - gps.csv (lat, lon, sample_id, ...)
#    - raw.csv (sample_id, var1, var2, ...)
csv_to_parquet --gps gps.csv --raw raw.csv --out raw.parquet

# 2) C backend: raw.parquet → processed.parquet
backend/build/emx_cli raw.parquet processed.parquet
```
Raw Parquet schema (example):
- sample_id (string)
- lat (double)
- lon (double)
- var1..varN (double)

Processed Parquet schema (example):
- per‑k metrics (k, CH, Rs, SST, SSE, perm stats)
- optimal_k (int)
- assignments (sample_id, group)
- group_means (k × variables)
- Exits with non‑zero on error (currently, CSV/Parquet are unimplemented placeholders, so it will error until those are filled in).

Developer CSV output (current runner):
- Header once: `K,Group,Sample,<bin columns...>,% explained,Total inequality,Between region inequality,Total sum of squares,Within group sum of squares,Calinski-Harabasz pseudo-F statistic`
- Rows for every k=2..20, preserving input row order within each group; raw numeric tokens are preserved for data cells; metrics appended as columns per row.
 - Output is regression-tested locally against `data/processed/sample_output_CORRECT.csv`.

### Header deprecation note
- `include/algo.h` and `include/backend.h` are retained for the CLI pathway only and are considered deprecated for consumers of the library. New code should include `sweep.h` and use `em_prepare_and_sweep(...)` (and the lower-level APIs in `preprocess.h`, `metrics.h`, and `grouping.h`).

## C APIs (current state)

- High‑level config (future convenience call):
```c
// backend/include/backend.h
typedef struct {
  int32_t num_samples;
  int32_t num_variables;
  bool row_proportions;
  bool grand_total_norm;
  bool ch_permutations;
  int32_t ch_permutations_n;
  uint64_t rng_seed;
} em_config_t;

int em_run_from_csv(const char *csv_path,
                    const char *parquet_out_path,
                    const em_config_t *cfg);
```

- Algorithm entrypoint (array → Parquet):
```c
// backend/include/algo.h
int em_run_algo(const double *data,
                int32_t rows,
                int32_t cols,
                const char *const *colnames,
                const char *const *rownames,
                const char *parquet_out_path);
```

- CSV table representation:
```c
// backend/include/csv.h
typedef struct {
  double *data;      // row‑major [rows * cols]
  char **colnames;   // size cols
  char **rownames;   // size rows
  int32_t rows;
  int32_t cols;
} csv_table_t;

int csv_read_table(const char *path, csv_table_t *out);
void csv_free_table(csv_table_t *t);
```

## Roadmap (backend)
- Implement CSV parsing (libcsv/Arrow CSV or a small internal reader).
- Implement Parquet writing (Apache Arrow C/GLib APIs), with a short‑term Python‑mediated fallback if needed.
- Port the VB6 entropy/classification routine into `src/algo/backend_algo.c` using `double` precision and the config in `em_config_t`.
- Add unit tests in `backend/tests/` and wire them in CTest (already configured).

## Notes
- The C library is designed for a stable ABI so Python bindings (cffi, if we decide to use it) can link without churn.
- No temp files are used; data flows in‑memory from CSV to Parquet.
- Error handling is via integer return codes (0 success, non‑zero error); an error enum will be added when CSV/Parquet are implemented.
