### Meeting: Group Meeting 10

### Date/Time
- 01/10/2025, 14:00–15:00

### Attendees
- Present: Jeremy, Dongkai, Stephen, Will, Noah, Ben
- Apologies: None

### Past Action Items
- Jeremy — Write document for full run through — Status: Carried over

### Discussion / New Meeting Points
- Steve, Noah, Will and Ben meeting on Friday
  - Steve has enabled build/run across multiple OSs
  - Changes not pushed yet
  - Makefile shown; checks OS
  - Concern: Piers would need that library to run the C
  - Issue with PyInstaller
  - Options discussed:
    - Provide install instructions with all dependencies
    - Revert to Python CSV → Parquet generator
  - Team consensus: second option is easier and more maintainable
- Dongkai will submit a GitHub Issue with tasks for pickup

### Decisions Made
- Proceed with Python CSV → Parquet conversion instead of PyInstaller path
- Keep Makefile OS checks; avoid external C-library dependency for end users

### Action Items
- Dongkai — Write up GitHub Issue — Due: 08/10/2025
- Steve — Implement Python CSV → Parquet conversion — Due: 08/10/2025
- Jeremy — KML export and search functionality — Due: 08/10/2025

### Next Meeting
- Wednesday, 08/10/2025


